1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 21:2025.07.18.664980. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.18.664980.

Endothelial Nucleoporin93 (Nup93) Maintains Vascular Function via Sun1-Dependent 
Regulation of RhoA-eNOS Signaling.

Nguyen TD, Khan YZ, Hossen F, Makim R, Banks JM, Michalkiewicz J, Winek MA, de 
Moraes LHO, Lee JC, Phillips SA, Lee MY.

As the innermost lining of blood vessels, endothelial cells (ECs) regulate blood 
flow, maintain vascular tone, and limit inflammation for vessel health. 
EC-derived nitric oxide (NO), synthesized by endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS), is a vasodilator essential for improving blood flow and vascular 
homeostasis. The RhoA/ROCK pathway regulates eNOS levels, where overactivation 
decreases eNOS expression and downstream NO production. As such, RhoA/ROCK 
hyperactivity and increased pMLC have been identified as major contributors to 
age-associated vasoconstriction and hypertension. Intriguingly, recent studies 
identify Sun1, a key component of the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton 
(LINC) complex, as a major regulator of RhoA/ROCK activity. Moreover, 
endothelial aging deteriorates nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) ( i.e. nucleoporin 
[Nup93]) and impairs nucleocytoplasmic transport, thereby insinuating a role for 
nuclear envelope components in vessel homeostasis. Here, we show that targeted 
loss of endothelial Nup93 in adult mice significantly reduces eNOS expression 
and NO bioavailability for consequent defects in NO-dependent vasodilatory 
responses. In vitro knockdown of Nup93 in primary human ECs also decreases both 
eNOS expression and NO production. Mechanistically, we find that loss of Nup93 
significantly reduces endothelial Sun1 levels for a concomitant increase in RhoA 
activity. Indeed, restoring Sun1 protein levels in Nup93-deficient ECs mitigates 
RhoA activity to rescue both eNOS expression and NO production. Taken together, 
we demonstrate endothelial Nup93, through Sun1 stabilization, as a novel 
regulator of eNOS-NO signaling and vessel reactivity, contributing to the 
growing importance of nuclear membrane components in EC and vascular biology.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.18.664980
PMCID: PMC12330544
PMID: 40777343