1. Front Nutr. 2025 Jul 22;12:1611227. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2025.1611227.
eCollection  2025.

Global burden and trends of high BMI-attributable chronic kidney disease: a 
comprehensive analysis from 1990 to 2021 and projections to 2035.

Tan H(#)(1), Liu Z(#)(2), Zhang Y(1), Yang K(2), Zeng Y(2), Li G(1), Xiao Z(1), 
Li Y(2), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Laboratory of Kidney Disease, Hunan Provincial 
People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: High body mass index (BMI) is a major modifiable risk factor for 
chronic kidney disease (CKD), significantly contributing to its global burden. 
This study aimed to systematically evaluate the global burden of CKD 
attributable to high BMI from 1990 to 2021, identify demographic and regional 
variations, evaluate contributing risk factors, and project future trends 
through 2035.
METHODS: The population-based analysis utilized data from the Global Burden of 
Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD) 2021, encompassing 204 
countries and territories across 21 GBD regions. Age-standardized mortality rate 
(ASMR) and age-standardized disability-adjusted life years rate (ASDR) were 
assessed using percentage change (PC) and estimated annual percentage change 
(EAPC). Decomposition analysis quantified drivers of mortality and DALYs 
changes, while Bayesian age-period-cohort models projected future trends.
FINDINGS: From 1990 and 2021, the ASMR of CKD attributable to high BMI increased 
from 2.69 (95% UI: 1.37-4.14) to 5.06 (95% UI: 2.7-7.5) per 100,000, and the 
ASDR rose from 69.13 (95% UI: 35.06-106) to 122.08 (95% UI: 66.25-180.18) per 
100,000. Projections estimate continued to increase by 2035, with ASMR reaching 
5.81 (95% UI: 3.55-8.07) and ASDR 149.42 (95% UI: 99.45-199.39) per 100,000. Sex 
and age disparities were evident: males showed higher ASR increases and earlier 
onset of disease burden, while older females experienced a higher overall 
burden. Regionally, low- and low-middle SDI areas exhibited the most rapid 
burden escalation, while some high-income countries achieved burden reduction. 
Among the attributable etiologies, hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM) were predominant, with hypertension more common in males (42.05%) and 
T2DM in females (43.71%).
CONCLUSION: The global burden of CKD attributable to high BMI has risen markedly 
over the past three decades, with widening disparities by geography, age, and 
sex. The COVID-19 pandemic may have further complicated risk dynamics and data 
quality. These findings highlight an urgent need for globally coordinated, 
locally adapted prevention strategies, particularly targeting younger males and 
populations in low-SDI regions.

Copyright Â© 2025 Tan, Liu, Zhang, Yang, Zeng, Li, Xiao, Li and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2025.1611227
PMCID: PMC12330218
PMID: 40777172

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.