1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 23:2025.07.22.25330603. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.22.25330603.

Comparing angiogenic biomarkers and clinical history of hypertensive disease of 
pregnancy with the association of hypertension up to 15 years after delivery.

Anwer T, Cantonwine DE, Seely EW, Gray K, McElrath TF.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the independent and comparative association of a 
history of hypertensive disease of pregnancy and elevated serum soluble fms-like 
tyrosine kinase 1 to placental growth factor (sFlt-1/PlGF) ratio during the 
second half of pregnancy with the development of HTN up to 15 years after 
delivery.Study Design: N=1,238 singleton pregnancies were part of a prospective 
birth cohort study that enrolled patients from 2006-2008. Serum sFlt-1/PlGF was 
collected at a median of 26.0 and 35.1 weeks gestation. Adjusted Cox 
proportional hazard models estimated hazard ratios and 95%CI for the time to 
diagnosis for Stage 1 and Stage 2 HTN within 15 years PP in association with 
diagnoses of HDP and interquartile range of sFlt-1/PlGF. We adjusted for 
confounders.
RESULTS: Of the n=993 women, n=260 (29.18%) were diagnosed with stage 1 and 
n=169 (17.0%) with Stage 2 HTN within 15 years of delivering.A history of PE or 
a history of gestational hypertension were both significantly associated with 
developing HTN later in life with adjusted hazard ratios of 2.17 (95% CI, 
1.44-3.28) and 3.50 (95% CI, 2.21-5.54). There was no significant association 
between the hazard of developing HTN and the sFlt/PlGF ratio. However, mean PlGF 
levels during pregnancy in those who remained normotensive in the follow-up were 
higher at 546.7 pg/mL (SD= 369.5) compared to 513.7 pg/mL (SD=389.9) in the 
group with stage 1 and stage 2 HTN combined and 471.7 pg/mL (SD=471.7) in the 
stage 2 only group (p=0.008 and p=0.001).
CONCLUSION: In patients followed for up to 15 years after delivery, a clinical 
history of hypertensive disease of pregnancy was significantly associated with 
the hazard of developing HTN later in life, while elevated sFlt-1/PlGF biomarker 
levels were not.However, mean PlGF levels in the latter half of pregnancy were 
significantly lower in those who developed HTN later in life.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.22.25330603
PMCID: PMC12330459
PMID: 40778131