1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2025 Jul 29;26(7):38690. doi: 10.31083/RCM38690.
eCollection  2025 Jul.

Cardiovascular-Kidney-Metabolic Effects: Steroidal and Nonsteroidal 
Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists.

Bozkurt B(1), Januzzi JL(2)(3), Bansal S(4).

Author information:
(1)Winters Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Baim Institute for Clinical Research, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Cardiovascular (CV)-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome is a complex disorder 
characterized by the co-occurrence of CV risk factors, including chronic kidney 
disease (CKD), hypertension, and metabolic dysfunction, which creates a vicious 
cycle where one factor negatively impacts the others, ultimately leading to poor 
overall CV and kidney outcomes. Overactivation of the mineralocorticoid 
receptor, through binding with aldosterone and ligand-independent mechanisms, is 
implicated in the pathogenesis of CKM; mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists 
(MRAs) can block this interaction. Steroidal MRAs are currently recommended for 
people with heart failure (HF) with reduced ejection fraction and hypertension; 
however, the role of nonsteroidal MRAs in CKM is evolving. Indeed, steroidal 
MRAs have demonstrated efficacy against composite CV-related mortality and 
hospitalization, elevated systolic blood pressure, and hospitalizations for 
worsening HF in clinical trials of individuals with HF, CKD, and 
treatment-resistant hypertension. Moreover, the nonsteroidal MRA finerenone has 
demonstrated risk reductions for composite CV-related outcomes and CKD 
progression in patients with HF with mildly reduced or preserved ejection 
fraction and people with CKD associated with type 2 diabetes. Ongoing phase 3 
trials are evaluating the efficacy and safety of nonsteroidal MRAs in 
individuals with HF and reduced ejection fraction, as well as those with mildly 
reduced or preserved ejection fraction, potentially expanding their role in 
managing CKM conditions. This review examines current clinical evidence for the 
use of MRAs in people with CKM syndrome.

Copyright: Â© 2025 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/RCM38690
PMCID: PMC12326440
PMID: 40776944

Conflict of interest statement: Biykem Bozkurt reports consultancy with Abbott, 
Abiomed, American Regent, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Cardurion, Cytokinetics, Daiichi Sankyo, Johnson & Johnson, Lantheus, Liva Nova, 
Merck, Regeneron, Renovacor, Respicardia/Zoll, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, and Vifor. 
James L. Januzzi has received consulting fees or advisory and funding grants 
from Roche Diagnostics, Siemens Diagnostics, Abbott Diagnostics, and Merck. 
Shweta Bansal has received research funding from the National Institutes of 
Health, Bayer, Novo Nordisk, and Boehringer Ingelheim; royalties from UpToDate; 
and she serves as faculty speaker for Home Dialysis University and in the 
advisory boards for Calliditas Therapeutics, Novartis, Vera, and Travere 
Therapeutics. However, these companies had no role in the handling or conduct of 
the study.