1. Iran J Public Health. 2025 Jul;54(7):1444-1451. doi:
10.18502/ijph.v54i7.19150.

Prevalence and Risk Factors of Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders among Pregnant 
Women in Kyrgyzstan.

Sultanalieva R(1), Zhunusova B(2), Knyazeva V(2), Abylova N(1), Sorokin A(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Department, Kyrgyz State Medical Academy, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.
(2)Therapy Department, International Higher School of Medicine, Bishkek, 
Kyrgyzstan.
(3)Department of Physics, Medical Informatics, and Biology, Kyrgyz Russian 
Slavic University, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to determine the prevalence of carbohydrate metabolism 
disorders among pregnant women in Kyrgyzstan based on the 2013 WHO diagnostic 
criteria, to study their frequency, and to assess the influence of key risk 
factors on the likelihood of developing gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and 
overt diabetes.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was conducted, including 617 pregnant women 
between 2022 and 2024. All participants underwent an oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT) in the second half of pregnancy. Diagnosis of GDM and overt diabetes was 
carried out according to WHO criteria. Multivariate logistic regression was used 
to analyze risk factors. ROC analysis was performed to assess the diagnostic 
value of the number of risk factors in predicting carbohydrate metabolism 
disorders.
RESULTS: The incidence of GDM was 18.8% (116/617), and overt diabetes - 6.96% 
(43/617). The main risk factors for GDM were: age over 35 years (P = 0.002), 
arterial hypertension (P = 0.001), second-degree family history of diabetes (P = 
0.001), pre-pregnancy overweight or obesity (P = 0.002), and multiparity (P = 
0.000). For overt diabetes, key risk factors included first-degree family 
history of diabetes (P = 0.034), second-degree family history (P = 0.001), and 
overweight or obesity (P = 0.018).
CONCLUSION: An increase in the number of risk factors correlates with the 
incidence of GDM and overt diabetes. However, for GDM, the number of risk 
factors is not a reliable predictor, highlighting the need for universal 
screening of all pregnant women. For overt diabetes, the number of risk factors 
showed satisfactory predictive value.

CopyrightÂ© 2025 Sultanalieva et al. Published by Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/ijph.v54i7.19150
PMCID: PMC12325850
PMID: 40777910