1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 21:2025.07.18.25331742. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.18.25331742.

A systematic review of behavioral interventions to improve maternal outcomes for 
women in the United States at high risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes.

Phipps JE, D'Souza I, Satish N, Ketchersid A, Whipps MDM, Van Noord M, Ebong I, 
Khemet Taiwo T, Sudhof LS, Keeton V, Hedriana HL, Simmons LA.

INTRODUCTION: Adverse pregnancy outcomes (APOs), including hypertensive 
disorders, gestational diabetes, and preterm birth, affect 10-20% of U.S. 
pregnancies and substantially increase long-term cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
risk. While behavioral interventions during pregnancy may reduce risk factors 
for APOs, evidence remains limited on which strategies are effective for 
high-risk women. This systematic review addresses this gap by examining patterns 
in intervention design, outcome reporting, and areas where research fails to 
meet the needs of at-risk pregnant populations.
METHODS: We searched PubMed and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials for articles published from January 1, 2005, to June 30, 2024. Following 
PRISMA guidelines, we included U.S.-based randomized controlled trials of 
behavioral interventions: diet, physical activity, sleep, mindfulness, or 
self-monitoring, delivered during pregnancy to women at high risk of APOs. See 
Supplemental Figure S4 for the PRISMA Checklist. Two reviewers independently 
performed screening, data extraction, and risk-of-bias assessment using the 
Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool.
RESULTS: Of 3,261 studies screened, 43 met inclusion criteria. Most 
interventions focused on individuals with prepregnancy overweight or obesity, 
often excluding those with other CVD risk factors. Thirty-six trials reported 
improvements in outcomes such as gestational weight gain (GWG), postpartum 
weight retention, blood pressure, or biomarkers. Interventions combining diet 
and physical activity showed the greatest benefit. However, only four trials 
demonstrated improvements in clinical outcomes like gestational diabetes, 
hypertensive disorders, or lipid profiles. Outcome measures and timelines varied 
widely, and few trials included postpartum follow-up or assessed outcomes beyond 
GWG.
DISCUSSION: Although behavioral interventions during pregnancy are growing in 
number, trials are limited by heterogeneous designs, narrow inclusion criteria, 
and inconsistent outcome reporting. The focus on GWG and exclusion of women with 
complex risk profiles reduce generalizability. Inclusive research with 
standardized outcomes is urgently needed to improve maternal health and reduce 
long-term CVD risk.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.18.25331742
PMCID: PMC12330428
PMID: 40778148