1. J Endourol. 2025 Aug 8. doi: 10.1177/08927790251364272. Online ahead of print.

Comparative Analysis of 30- and 90-Day Outcomes of Aquablation vs Other Surgical 
Treatments for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia.

Florissi IS(1), Kohn T(1), Pupo DG(1), Nugent L(1), Alshak MN(1), Agrawal P(1), 
Nimmagadda N(1).

Author information:
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Background: Short-term outcomes of Aquablation as the treatment for benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) have not been well characterized. The aim of this 
analysis was to compare rates of 30- and 90-day complications following 
Aquablation with those after transurethral resection of prostate (TURP), 
UroLift, holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP), and laparoscopic 
simple prostatectomy (SP). Methods: Using the TriNetX Research database, a 
collaborative claims and electronic medical record research network of 79 large 
health care organizations, we conducted a propensity-matched retrospective 
cohort study of all patients who underwent Aquablation (Current Procedural 
Terminology [CPT] 0421T or Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System ((HCPCS) 
C2596), TURP (CPT 52601), UroLift (CPT 52441), HoLEP (CPT 52649), or 
laparoscopic SP (CPT 55866, 55867) between the dates of January 1, 2017, and 
December 31, 2023. We performed a propensity score matching for age at time of 
operation, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) 
range to determine the relative risk of developing the following outcomes at 30- 
and 90-days postoperatively: visit to the emergency department, hospital 
readmission, catheter re-insertion, and urinary tract infection. Results: Prior 
to matching, data were available for 1054 Aquablation, 18,945 TURP, 3966 
UroLift, 5200 HoLEP, and 5369 laparoscopic SP patients; 53% of Aquablation cases 
were performed in 2023. After matching Aquablation to each other procedure, the 
cohorts ranged in size from 1048 to 1054. At 30 and 90 days postoperatively, 
patients who underwent Aquablation were more likely to be readmitted to the 
hospital and require catheter re-insertion than most operative cohorts. When 
eliminating from the analysis patients who underwent Aquablation in 2023, the 
association between Aquablation and readmission did not persist. Conclusions: 
Patients undergoing Aquablation may experience higher rates of hospital 
readmission at 30 and 90 days postoperatively than most other surgical BPH 
cohorts, which may be because of the learning curve associated with the 
procedure or applying the procedure to larger prostate volumes.

DOI: 10.1177/08927790251364272
PMID: 40778854