1. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2025 Aug;27(8):e70075. doi: 10.1111/jch.70075.

Blood Pressure and Hypertension in Adolescents and Young Adults: Results From a 
Nationwide Screening Program.

Loo WTW(1), Ho WHH(1), Lim DYZ(1), Thiagarajan N(1), Ang WK(1), Han JYJ(1), Goy 
S(1), Sng GGR(1), Lim LK(1), Lim HY(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Classification Centre, Central Manpower Base, Singapore Armed Forces, 
Singapore, Singapore.

Literature on blood pressure (BP) norms in the adolescent and young adult (AYA) 
population remains sparse compared to adults. This study aims to describe the BP 
norms, prevalence of undiagnosed hypertension, and associations with demographic 
and anthropometric data among asymptomatic Asian AYA males. We studied 
retrospective cross-sectional data from individuals attending a national 
centralized BP screening program for enlistment over 30 months. Each 
individual's initial office BP reading was used to determine the cohort's BP 
norms. Individuals with a high reading, defined as systolic ≥140 mmHg and/or 
diastolic ≥90 mmHg, repeated office BP at a separate office visit. Those 
demonstrating two high readings underwent 24-h ambulatory BP (ABP) measurement. 
49 033 males of median age 18.1 years were studied. The median, 75th centile, 
and 95th centile initial visit office BP readings were 121/74, 130/81, and 
139/89 mmHg. 302 (0.62%; 95% CI, 0.55-0.69) were diagnosed with hypertension by 
office BP criteria. 270 underwent ABP measurement-180 (0.37%; 95% CI, 0.31-0.42) 
and 239 (0.49%; 95% CI, 0.43-0.55) had hypertension by ESC/ESH and ACC/AHA 
criteria, respectively. Higher weight, body mass index (BMI), and body fat 
percentage were associated with hypertension. The prevalence of undiagnosed 
hypertension among Asian AYA males is <1%. Norm-based cut-offs for high BP 
yielded absolute-value cut-offs similar to those recommended by adult 
guidelines; the 95th centile corresponded closely to 140/90 mmHg. Given similar 
diagnostic cut-offs with both norm-based and absolute-value approaches, both 
methods may be adopted. Focused screening of subgroups at higher risk of 
hypertension, such as obese individuals, may be considered in resource-limited 
settings.

© 2025 The Author(s). The Journal of Clinical Hypertension published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jch.70075
PMID: 40776427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]