1. Cureus. 2025 Jul 8;17(7):e87545. doi: 10.7759/cureus.87545. eCollection 2025 
Jul.

Xylazine Withdrawal: A Case Report From the Intensive Care Unit to the Medical 
Ward.

Yang HY(1), Nensey C(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Medicine, Northridge Hospital Medical Center, Los Angeles, USA.

Xylazine is a centrally acting alpha-2 adrenergic agonist commonly used with 
fentanyl in illicit drug mixtures, yet its withdrawal profile remains poorly 
characterized. We report a case of a 35-year-old man with polysubstance use, 
significant for fentanyl with xylazine and bipolar disorder. He presented with 
seizure-like activity and agonal breathing, requiring intensive care unit 
admission. The patient's persistent hypertension, agitation, and autonomic 
dysregulation were inconsistent with typical opioid withdrawal or sepsis. 
Initial management with sedatives and multiple antihypertensives was 
ineffective. Agitation improved with dexmedetomidine, whereas blood pressure and 
autonomic control were achieved after initiation of a transdermal clonidine 
patch, followed by transition to oral clonidine with tapering. The adjunctive 
use of gabapentin, lacosamide, and quetiapine helped manage psychomotor 
agitation and generalized pain. The patient recovered to his baseline and was 
discharged to an outpatient rehabilitation program. This case highlights the 
importance of recognizing xylazine withdrawal as an independent toxidrome 
requiring targeted alpha-2 agonist therapy and supports evidence-based, 
multidisciplinary collaboration for symptom control and clinical stabilization.

Copyright Â© 2025, Yang et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.87545
PMCID: PMC12331367
PMID: 40777679

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Informed consent for treatment 
and open access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this 
study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure 
form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have 
declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the 
submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they 
have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years 
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.