1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2025 Aug 7;329:1160-1164. doi: 10.3233/SHTI251021.

CARE-Former: Enhancing Prediction of Comorbidities in Rheumatoid Arthritis via 
Asymmetric Complication Associations.

Yu H(1), Tian Y(1), Ouyang S(1), Li D(1), Tong D(2), Zhou T(2), Jiang N(3), Wang 
Q(3), Tian X(3), Li J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Biomedical Engineering and Instrument Science, Zhejiang 
University, Engineering Research Center of EMR and Intelligent Expert System, 
Ministry of Education, Hangzhou 310027, China.
(2)Research Center for Data Hub and Security, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311121, 
China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital (PUMCH), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and 
Immunologic Diseases (NCRC-DID), Ministry of Science and Technology, State Key 
Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology 
and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100730, China.

A significant proportion of rheumatoid arthritis patients experience multiple 
organ-related complications, severely affecting their quality of life. 
Establishing a dynamic prediction model that adequately considers the 
associative relationships of complications can contribute to the health 
management of patients. In this study, we propose to introduce a complication 
association enhancement module into the dynamic time-series prediction model to 
improve its performance. This method captures the triggering and dependency 
relationships between complications, reveals comorbidity interactions, and 
identifies high-risk complication combinations through clustering. We identified 
a cluster of comorbidities consisting of interstitial lung lesions, pulmonary 
hypertension, and cardiovascular disease and achieved better predictive 
performance than previously proposed methods on the CREDIT dataset (Macro 
accuracy=0.978 Micro F1=0.755 Micro AUC=0.910). To the best of our knowledge, 
this is the first study to introduce disease associations in dynamic medical 
time-series data to enhance early warning of complications in rheumatoid 
arthritis.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI251021
PMID: 40776039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]