1. PLoS One. 2025 Aug 8;20(8):e0329677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0329677. 
eCollection 2025.

Proximal and distal middle cerebral artery diameter ratio and lenticulostriate 
artery infarction.

Yoo JS(1), Choi JH(2), Park JY(1), Song JY(1), Chang JY(1), Kang DW(1), Kwon 
SU(1), Jo HJ(2)(3), Kim BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(2)Department of Mechanical engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea.
(3)Division of Advanced Nuclear Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Lipohyalinotic degeneration (LD) and branch atheromatous disease 
(BAD) can contribute to subcortical infarctions in the lenticulostriate artery 
(LSA) territory. This study aimed to identify the association between the 
proximal and distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) diameter ratio and the two 
different pathomechanisms of LSA infarction.
METHODS: Patients with acute LSA infarctions categorized as small vessel 
occlusive disease were included. Demographic and clinical data, along with MCA 
geometrical variables, were collected. LD and BAD were differentiated based on 
the length of the infarction diameter and number of axial slices. The 
proximal/distal M1 diameter ratio was calculated. MCA geometrics between LD and 
BAD were compared. Independent factors associated with LD were investigated. 
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis was used to evaluate hemodynamic 
parameters.
RESULTS: A total of 117 patients were included, of whom 64 (54.7%) and 53 
(45.3%) were classified as BAD and LD, respectively. LD was associated with 
hypertension and favorable prognosis. MCA geometric variables revealed that LD 
had a higher proximal/distal M1 diameter ratio, indicating a potential 
distinguishing factor. Multivariate analysis confirmed the independent 
association between LD and the proximal/distal M1 diameter ratio. The 
proximal/distal M1 diameter ratio also showed a positive correlation with the 
number of ipsilesional lacunes. CFD analysis showed that the LD model had 
faster, greater blood influx into LSAs and higher wall shear stress and pressure 
gradient compared with the BAD model.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests MCA geometry, particularly the proximal/distal 
M1 diameter ratio, may serve as an independent factor for identifying LD.

Copyright: Â© 2025 Yoo et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0329677
PMID: 40779593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.