1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2025 Jul 18;26(7):37252. doi: 10.31083/RCM37252.
eCollection  2025 Jul.

The Correlation Between Sleep and Coronary Heart Disease: A Review.

Shi Q(1), Gao Y(1)(2), Shi Z(1), Li M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Central China Fuwai Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Fuwai Central China Cardiovascular Hospital, 450000 Zhengzhou, 
Henan, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital, Henan 
Provincial People's Hospital, 450000 Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(3)Central China Subcenter of National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Henan 
Cardiovascular Disease Center, 450000 Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

Coronary heart disease (CHD), which is characterized by the coronary arteries 
narrowing or becoming obstructed due to atherosclerosis, leads to myocardial 
ischemia, hypoxia, or necrosis. Owing to an aging population and lifestyle 
changes, the incidence of CHD and subsequent mortality rates continue to rise, 
making CHD one of the leading causes of disability and death worldwide. 
Hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking, obesity, and genetic factors 
are considered major risk factors for CHD; however, these factors do not fully 
explain the complexity and diversity in the etiology of CHD. Sleep, an 
indispensable part of human physiological processes, is crucial for maintaining 
physical and mental health. In recent years, the rapid pace of modern life has 
led to an increasing number of patients experiencing an insufficient amount of 
sleep, declining sleep quality, and sleep disorders. Therefore, the correlation 
between sleep and CHD has become a focal point in current research. This review 
aims to address the relationship between sleep duration, quality, and sleep 
disorder-related diseases with CHD and emphasizes potential underlying 
mechanisms and possible clinical implications. Moreover, this review aimed to 
provide a theoretical basis and clinical guidance for the prevention and 
treatment of CHD.

Copyright: Â© 2025 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/RCM37252
PMCID: PMC12326418
PMID: 40776943

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.