1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 23:2025.07.22.25331985. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.22.25331985.

Prevalence of Risk Factors and Established Cardiovascular Disease Among All of 
Us Participants: Benchmarking Against National Estimates.

Yang M, Admassu T, Krumholz HM, Huang C, Murugiah K.

INTRODUCTION: Knowing how demographics, cardiovascular risk factors and 
established cardiovascular disease (CVD) of All of Us (AoU) Research Program 
participants differ from the U.S population is important for cardiovascular 
researchers using these data, and to inform the generalizability of findings.
METHODS: We included AoU participants ≥18 years enrolled between May 2017-June 
2022. 'AoU Survey' cohort included participants who completed the Personal and 
Family Health History survey. 'AoU EHR' included participants with linked EHR 
data. Cardiovascular risk factors and established CVD overall and by demographic 
sub-groups were compared to a weighted sample of adults ≥18 years from the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2017-March 2020 cycle. 
Cardiovascular risk factors and established CVD were identified through survey 
questions in 'AoU Survey' and NHANES, and through SNOMED codes for 'AoU EHR'.
RESULTS: 'AoU Survey' (N=185,232) was older than NHANES (N=9,683 representing 
248 million) (56±17 vs 48±18 years), with more female (60.4% vs 51.8%) and Black 
(18.6% vs 11.5%, all P <0.001) participants. Prevalence of cardiovascular 
comorbidities in 'AoU Survey' was similar to NHANES overall, but lower when age 
stratified. However, this pattern was not observed among Black participants, who 
exhibited higher hypertension (42.2% vs 39%), diabetes (19.2% vs 12.5%), and 
congestive heart failure (3.8% vs 3.6%) rates than the U.S Black population. In 
contrast, female participants showed lower cardiovascular comorbidities. 'AoU 
EHR' with its code-based identification had higher prevalence of cardiovascular 
comorbidities.
CONCLUSION: AoU includes more historically underrepresented groups, as intended. 
However, researchers should account for differences in disease prevalence and 
subgroup characteristics with the U.S. population when interpreting survey 
estimates.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.22.25331985
PMCID: PMC12330449
PMID: 40778153