1. Explor Res Clin Soc Pharm. 2025 Jul 22;19:100636. doi: 
10.1016/j.rcsop.2025.100636. eCollection 2025 Sep.

Identification and follow up of cardiovascular disease risk factors among 
participants at a pharmacy student-led screening program.

Qureshi UB(1), Mpanya D(2), Khan R(1), Vally M(1), Orchard A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 
School of Therapeutic Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Clinical 
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: The increased prevalence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and 
associated risk factors like hypertension, type 2 diabetes, dyslipideamia, and 
obesity underscores the need for proactive screening. Given the insidious 
progression of these conditions, early detection is paramount. The Screening and 
Testing Programme for Pharmacy Students (STEPPS) is a pharmacy student-led, 
work-based learning initiative at the University of the Witwatersrand that 
provides preventive cardiovascular risk screening to university staff and 
students.
AIM: To identify the occurrence of underlying and uncontrolled risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease from a convenience sample of participants who attended 
the STEPPS screening events at the University of the Witwatersrand in year 2022. 
The study further determined whether the referral of the identified participants 
led to a diagnosis and intervention.
METHODOLOGY: A cross-sectional study was conducted in a screening event called 
STEPPS at the University of the Witwatersrand. A convenience sample of 
university staff and students aged 18 years and older who voluntarily 
participated was included. Fourth-year pharmacy students conducted screenings, 
including blood pressure, blood glucose, cholesterol, and anthropometric 
measurements. Participants with abnormal results were referred for further care, 
and follow-up was conducted via telephone interviews several months later. 
Quantitative data were analysed using descriptive and inferential statistics in 
STATA® 18.0.
RESULTS: There was a self-reported occurrence of hypertension (6.5 %), diabetes 
(2.09 %), dyslipideamia (2.87 %), and obesity (3.91 %). Elevated readings were 
observed among 136 (18.25 %) participants for blood pressure, 13 (2.83 %) 
participants for blood glucose and, 50 (11.36 %) participants for blood 
cholesterol. Among the CVD-related referrals based on abnormal screening results 
(33 participants), 75 % complied. Of these, 35 % exhibited significant findings, 
including newly diagnosed cases (43 %), disease escalation (29 %) and lifestyle 
modifications (29 %). Among follow-up participants, 16 (80 %) participants 
reported undergoing interventions post-screening.
CONCLUSION: The student-led initiative effectively identified the occurrences of 
undiagnosed and uncontrolled cases at the university with 80 % of referrals 
leading to a medical intervention.

© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rcsop.2025.100636
PMCID: PMC12329120
PMID: 40777572

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.