1. Ter Arkh. 2025 Jul 31;97(7):587-592. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2025.07.203278.

[The clinical case of use of extracorporeal hemocorrection methods in a female 
patient with refractory arterial hypertension. Case report].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Agadzhanyan АА(1), Khachatryan NT(1), Sivakova OА(1), Sokolov AА(1), Chazova 
IE(1).

Author information:
(1)Chazov National Medical Research Center of Cardiology.

The particular focus of the modern scientific community and practical medicine 
is concentrated on patients with refractory arterial hypertension when 
appropriate lifestyle measures and treatment with optimal or best tolerated 
doses of 5 or more drugs with diuretic and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist 
fail to lower office blood pressure to <140/90 mmHg. Inefficiency of recommended 
treatment methods requires new therapeutic approaches for these patients. The 
efficiency and mechanisms of extracorporeal treatment for blood pressure 
reduction in patients with malignant hypertension were first studied in the 
1980s and 1990s. This clinical case study demonstrates the use of extracorporeal 
hemocorrection procedures as part of the complex treatment of patients with 
refractory arterial hypertension.

Publisher: В настоящее время особый интерес научного сообщества и 
врачей-клиницистов привлекает группа пациентов с рефрактерной артериальной 
гипертензией, при которой 5 препаратов и более, включающие диуретик и антагонист 
минералокортикоидных рецепторов, не позволяют снизить артериальное давление 
менее чем 140 и 90 мм рт. ст. Неэффективность рекомендуемых методов лечения 
требует поиска новых терапевтических подходов у данной категории пациентов. В 
1980–90-е годы активно изучали эффективность и механизмы лечебного действия 
экстракорпоральных методов лечения, в том числе для снижения артериального 
давления у больных со злокачественным течением гипертонической болезни. Данный 
клинический случай посвящен эффективности применения процедур экстракорпоральной 
гемокоррекции в комплексном лечении пациентов с рефрактерной артериальной 
гипертензией.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2025.07.203278
PMID: 40778920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]