1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2025 Jul 30;26(7):37460. doi: 10.31083/RCM37460.
eCollection  2025 Jul.

Metabolic Alterations Associated With Right Ventricular Dysfunction in Pulmonary 
Arterial Hypertension: The Modulatory Effects and Improvement Mechanisms of 
Exercise.

Chen S(1), Liang G(1), Cheang L(1), Qu Q(1), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Innovation and Transformation of Luobing Theory, 
Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital With Nanjing Medical 
University, 210029 Nanjing, Jiansgu, China.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by a significant increase 
in pulmonary arterial pressure, leading to right ventricular failure (RVF), 
limited exercise capacity, and increased mortality risk. Right ventricular 
function is a critical determinant of exercise capacity and prognosis in 
patients with PAH. Meanwhile, alterations in cellular metabolism and bioenergy 
are common features in PAH, with the differential regulation of metabolic 
pathways playing a significant role in right ventricular dysfunction (RVD). 
Mitochondria, essential organelles responsible for energy production, 
biosynthetic pathways, and signal transduction, are particularly implicated in 
differential regulation. Exercise is increasingly recognized as a beneficial 
adjunct therapy; however, specific recommendations are often lacking in official 
guidelines. This review examines the changes in metabolic pathways associated 
with RVD in PAH, including glycolysis, glucose oxidation, fatty acid oxidation, 
glutamine metabolism, and arginine metabolism. Furthermore, this article 
discusses how exercise can modulate the aforementioned metabolic pathways to 
improve metabolic disturbances in the right ventricle and enhance right heart 
function. These are essential for developing effective rehabilitation 
strategies.

Copyright: Â© 2025 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/RCM37460
PMCID: PMC12326408
PMID: 40776975

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.