1. Orthop Surg. 2025 Aug 7. doi: 10.1111/os.70134. Online ahead of print.

Risk Factors for Physiologic Radiolucent Lines Under the Tibial Base Plate After 
Osteoarthritis With Primary Computer-Assisted Navigation TKA-A Nested 
Case-Control Study.

Tian H(1), Ma Y(1), Zhang J(1), Liu E(1), Zhang Z(1), Zuo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.

BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent joint disease in the 
elderly population, and primary computer-assisted navigation total knee 
arthroplasty (CA-TKA) remains a critical therapeutic intervention for OA. The 
presence of physiologic radiolucent lines (RLLs) beneath the tibial base plate 
following CA-TKA carries significant long-term clinical implications and is 
regarded as a potential indicator of prosthetic loosening. However, the specific 
risk factors for RLL development in CA-TKA, despite its theoretical precision 
advantages, remain poorly understood. This study aimed to characterize the 
clinical features of physiologic RLLs and identify associated risk factors.
METHODS: A retrospective nested case-control study was conducted using a cohort 
of OA patients who underwent primary CA-TKA between January 2021 and September 
2024. Physiologic RLLs were diagnosed according to the 1989 Knee Society Total 
Knee Arthroplasty Roentgenographic Evaluation and Scoring System. Patients with 
physiologic RLLs under the tibial base plate at follow-up were assigned to the 
RLLs group, while controls were matched 1:1 from the cohort based on follow-up 
time (±14 days). Covariates included age, gender, body mass index, smoking, 
alcohol consumption, hypertension, diabetes, surgical side, hospital stay 
duration, operative time, anesthesia type, continuous passive motion use, 
periprosthetic joint infection, total perioperative blood loss, 
preoperative/postoperative hip-knee-ankle angle (HKA), tibial cement mantle 
quality, cement penetration, and perioperative medial proximal tibial angle. 
Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to identify risk factors.
RESULTS: The cohort comprised 407 patients, of whom 113 developed physiologic 
RLLs under the tibial base plate. Univariate analysis identified age, 
preoperative HKA, tibial cement mantle defects, and cement penetration as 
statistically significant risk factors (all p < 0.05). Multivariate logistic 
regression analysis revealed that preoperative HKA (OR = 0.919, 95% 
CI = 0.876-0.963, p < 0.001), tibial cement mantle defects (OR = 2.638, 95% 
CI = 1.043-6.668, p = 0.040), and cement penetration (OR = 0.205, 95% 
CI = 0.126-0.332, p < 0.001) were independent risk factors for physiologic RLLs 
under the tibial base plate after primary CA-TKA in OA patients. Age was not an 
independent risk factor.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall incidence and clinical characteristics of physiologic 
RLLs under the tibial base plate after primary CA-TKA were comparable to those 
reported for conventional TKA techniques. This nested case-control study 
identified preoperative HKA, tibial cement mantle defects, and cement 
penetration as independent risk factors for physiologic RLLs, whereas age was 
not.

© 2025 The Author(s). Orthopaedic Surgery published by Tianjin Hospital and John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/os.70134
PMID: 40776479