1. Cureus. 2025 Jul 28;17(7):e88893. doi: 10.7759/cureus.88893. eCollection 2025 
Jul.

Sustained Effects of Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) Agonists on Blood Pressure 
in Obesity and Type 2 Diabetes: A Longitudinal Case Study.

Joseph J(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Aster DM Healthcare, Dubai, ARE.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) confer multiple 
cardiometabolic benefits beyond glycemic control, including weight reduction and 
potential cardiovascular protection. This case presents an 18-month follow-up of 
a 48-year-old obese male with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and hypertension, 
who achieved sustained blood pressure (BP) control and lipid stability on 
semaglutide following discontinuation of triple antihypertensive therapy. At 
baseline, the patient had a BMI of 38 kg/m², BP of 156/96 mmHg, and an elevated 
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c). Semaglutide was initiated at 0.25 mg weekly and 
titrated to 1 mg over six months. The patient exhibited progressive improvements 
in glycemic control, body weight, and BP, with HbA1c reduction and weight loss 
sustained over 18 months. Notably, BP remained consistently ≤130/80 mmHg, and 
lipid parameters remained stable without additional pharmacotherapy. This case 
underscores the potential of GLP-1 RAs to exert antihypertensive effects, 
possibly through weight loss, vascular endothelial function enhancement, and 
modulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). These findings 
support the evolving role of GLP-1 RAs as a multifaceted therapeutic option in 
managing T2DM with coexisting cardiovascular risk factors.

Copyright © 2025, Joseph et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.88893
PMCID: PMC12329614
PMID: 40777719

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Informed consent for treatment 
and open access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this 
study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure 
form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have 
declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the 
submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they 
have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years 
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.