1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 27:2025.07.23.666477. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.23.666477.

Adaptive Immunity Governs Regional Aortic Remodeling in Hypertension via 
Perivascular Adipose Tissue Plasticity.

Xu Y, Snider JC, Bersi MR.

Hypertension drives heterogeneous aortic remodeling, but the mechanisms 
underlying regional disparities remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that 
adaptive immunity orchestrates spatial differences in vascular dysfunction by 
modulating perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) phenotype and immune-metabolic 
crosstalk. Using angiotensin II (AngII)-infused wild-type (WT) and Rag1 -/- mice 
lacking T and B cells, we integrated biaxial mechanical testing, bulk 
transcriptomics, and PVAT analyses. In WT mice, AngII induced pronounced 
descending thoracic aorta (DTA) remodeling, marked by wall thickening, reduced 
circumferential stiffness and inflammatory gene upregulation ( Il6 , Ccl2 ). 
These changes were attenuated in Rag1 -/- mice, implicating T cells in thoracic 
maladaptation. Conversely, the infrarenal abdominal aorta (IAA) exhibited 
hypertensive resilience in WT mice but unmasked PPARÎ³-associated metabolic 
reprogramming ( Pparg , Adipoq ) in Rag1 -/- mice, suggesting T cells suppress 
protective abdominal adaptations. PVAT heterogeneity emerged as a key regulator 
wherein thoracic PVAT (T-PVAT) adopted a pro-inflammatory phenotype (CCL5, 
TIMP-1) in WT mice, exacerbating DTA damage, while Rag1 -/- mice showed 
thermogenic plasticity ( Ucp1 upregulation) in abdominal PVAT (A-PVAT). T cell 
reconstitution restored maladaptive remodeling in Rag1 -/- mice, confirming 
adaptive immunity's dual role in promoting thoracic injury and restraining 
metabolic resilience. This work identifies PVAT as an immune-metabolic switch 
governing regional susceptibility to vascular remodeling, offering spatially 
resolved strategies to preserve aortic compliance in hypertensive disease.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.23.666477
PMCID: PMC12330511
PMID: 40777378