1. Future Cardiol. 2025 Aug 8:1-12. doi: 10.1080/14796678.2025.2545133. Online 
ahead of print.

Tricuspid valve edge to edge repair vs replacement - a comparative analysis and 
future directions.

Hajj J(1), Kassab J(2), Zalaquett Z(1), Harb SC(1), Kapadia SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Heart and Vascular Institute, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 
USA.

Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is a common yet underrecognized valvular disease 
associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Recent advances in 
transcatheter therapies, namely transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (T-TEER) with 
the TriClip device (Abbott) and transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement (TTVR) 
with the EVOQUE device (Edwards Lifesciences), offer promising alternatives to 
surgery for severe symptomatic TR. This review compares both approaches with a 
focus on safety, procedural considerations, and clinical outcomes. Treating TR 
remains uniquely challenging due to the anatomical complexity of the valve, 
frequent lead interference, and common coexistence of RV dysfunction, atrial 
fibrillation, and pulmonary hypertension. Many affected patients are elderly and 
frail, rendering them poor surgical candidates. Optimal treatment requires 
individualized decision-making guided by detailed imaging and assessment of RV 
function and valvular anatomy. Both therapies achieve significant TR reduction, 
yet each carries distinct risks: TTVR is associated with higher rates of 
pacemaker implantation, bleeding, and RV failure, while T-TEER may lead to 
single leaflet device attachment (SLDA), leaflet injury, or residual TR. Careful 
patient selection is essential. Despite encouraging short-term outcomes, 
long-term data are needed to determine survival benefit and durability. Further 
studies are warranted to refine technique and optimize candidate selection.

DOI: 10.1080/14796678.2025.2545133
PMID: 40779241