1. Int Neurourol J. 2025 Jul;29(Suppl 1):S44-S52. doi: 10.5213/inj.2550150.075. 
Epub 2025 Jul 31.

High-Intensity Aerobic Exercise Prevents Angiotensin II-Induced Muscle Atrophy.

Won JH(1), Xiang YY(1), Baek KW(1)(2), Kang MJ(1), Kim JS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Education, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 
Korea.
(2)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Gyeongsang National 
University, Jinju, Korea.

PURPOSE: Angiotensin II (Ang II) is widely recognized as a primary factor in the 
development of hypertension; however, recent research also implicates it in 
skeletal muscle damage and atrophy. The precise mechanisms by which Ang II 
impacts muscle morphology and the molecular pathways related to atrophy remain 
unclear. Moreover, the potential protective effects of aerobic exercise against 
Ang II-induced muscle alterations have not been fully elucidated. This study 
aimed to investigate the effects of Ang II on skeletal muscle structure and 
atrophy-related molecular markers and to assess whether aerobic exercise can 
confer protective effects against these changes in an Ang II-induced animal 
model.
METHODS: Six-week-old mice (n =48) were divided into 4 groups: (1) control (CON, 
n =12), (2) Ang II (n =12), (3) Ang II plus low-intensity exercise (Ang II+LIE, 
n=12), and (4) Ang II plus high-intensity exercise (Ang II+HIE, n=12). Ang II 
was administered subcutaneously once daily for 4 weeks (1.4 mg/kg/day in 
phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.2). The Ang II+LIE and Ang II+HIE groups 
received daily Ang II injections along with their respective exercise protocols 
for 4 weeks.
RESULTS: The protein expression of inflammatory factors was significantly 
reduced in the Ang II+HIE group compared to the Ang II group (P < 0.05). 
Furthermore, the expression of muscle protein synthesis markers, including 
insulin-like growth factor 1, AKT, mammalian target of rapamycin, and S6K1, was 
significantly higher in the exercise groups than in the Ang II group (P<0.05). 
Notably, the expression of autophagy-related factors was also significantly 
elevated in the Ang II+HIE group compared to the Ang II group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Ang II-induced muscle atrophy was attenuated by aerobic exercise.

DOI: 10.5213/inj.2550150.075
PMID: 40776597