1. Med Int (Lond). 2025 Jul 31;5(5):58. doi: 10.3892/mi.2025.257. eCollection
2025  Sep-Oct.

Long-term outcomes following the clipping of ruptured intracranial aneurysms of 
the anterior circulation: A retrospective institutional study.

Pagkou D(1), Fotakopoulos G(1), Kogias E(1), Papadopoulou K(1), Patsalas I(1), 
Foroglou N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, AHEPA University Hospital, Aristotle University 
of Thessaloniki, 54636 Thessaloniki, Greece.

Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) constitutes a devastating and 
life-threatening neurosurgical emergency. Over a number of years, there has been 
a debate as regards the most suitable timing for surgery. The present 
retrospective study aimed to investigate the association between the timing of 
treatment and the outcomes of patients who underwent clipping of ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms. The present study performed a retrospective analysis of 
92 of 142 consecutive patients who were diagnosed with anterior circulation 
ruptured aneurysms and treated only by microsurgical clipping between January, 
2013 and December, 2018. The patients were divided into two groups, namely group 
A, which included patients who underwent microsurgical clipping for ruptured 
anterior circulation aneurysm in the early stages (within the first 3 days of 
aneurysm rupture occurrence), and group B, which included those who were 
operated on in the late stages (after 3 days of aneurysm rupture occurrence). 
The age of the patients ranged from 26 to 78 years, with a mean age of 54.6 
years. In total, 52 patients were female (56.6%) and 40 patients were male 
(43.4%). Risk factors associated with a high incidence of rupture included 
hypertension in 47 (51.0%) patients, cigarette smoking in 39 (42.3%) patients, 
alcohol consumption in 20 (21.7%) patients and diabetes mellitus in 2 (2.1%) 
patients. The present study revealed that the mortality rate was lower in group 
B (P=0.011; 4.3% compared with 11.9% in group A). This indicates that 
particularly the timing of surgery in group B (patients who were operated on in 
the late stages, after 3 days of aneurysm rupture occurrence) was more 
appropriate. In addition, no complications, post-operative hemiplegia and 
mortality were all independent factors associated with good outcomes (≥2 
modified Rankin scale) (P<0.05 for all three parameters). On the whole, the 
present study demonstrates that the outcomes of patients who underwent 
microsurgical clipping for ruptured anterior circulation aneurysms ≥3 days after 
admission or rupture occurrence, exhibited favorable outcomes compared to 
patients operated on during the first 2 days of occurrence.

Copyright: © 2025 Pagkou et al.

DOI: 10.3892/mi.2025.257
PMCID: PMC12329722
PMID: 40777593

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.