1. Poult Sci. 2025 May 8;104(10):105265. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2025.105265. Online 
ahead of print.

Effect of phloretin on antioxidant status, inflammatory cytokines, blood and 
biochemical indices, cecal microbial load, and growth performance in broiler 
chickens subjected to pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Fathi M(1), Zarrinkavyani K(2), Biranvand Z(3), Abd MAA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Payame Noor University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Ilam University, Ilam, 
Iran. Electronic address: k.zarrinkavyani@ilam.ac.ir.
(3)Researcher, Department of Animal Science, Ilam Agricultural and Natural 
Resources Research and Education Center, AREEO, Ilam, Iran.
(4)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Ilam University, Ilam, 
Iran.

This experiment was conducted to investigate the effects of dietary phloretin on 
broiler chickens under pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) conditions. A total 
of 500 one-day-old male broiler chickens were randomly allocated into five 
treatments with five replicate pens containing 20 birds per pen. The negative 
control group was reared at normal temperature and fed with basal diet while the 
PAH-treatments (positive control, F-200, F-400, and F-600) were exposed to low 
temperatures and received drinking water supplemented with excess salt to induce 
PAH and fed with basal diet containing 0, 200, 400, and 600 mg of phloretin per 
kilogram, respectively. Blood samples were collected from broilers at 42 days of 
age. Results showed that PAH decreased body weight gain (BWG), antioxidant 
capacity, immunoglobulin G (IgG), hematological indices, and cecal lactic acid 
bacteria population (CLBP), but increased feed intake (FI), PAH-related 
mortality, feed conversion ratio (FCR), PAH index, and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), 
triglyceride (TG), and total cholesterol (TC) contents in serum (P<0.001). Among 
the PAH treatments, supplementary phloretin improved growth performance indices 
and reduced PAH index, and PAH-related mortality (P < 0.01). The activities of 
superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase, and IgG, and IgM in 
serum were increased, and malondialdehyde was reduced by phloretin 
supplementation (P <0.01). The PAH-induced effect on contents of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines were reduced by dietary phloretin supplementation (P 
<0.01). Moreover, supplementation of diets with phloretin alleviated the adverse 
effect of PAH as reflected by a reduction in ALT, AST, TG, and TC (P <0.01). The 
red blood cell count, hemoglobin, hematocrit, and heterophil levels reduced by 
phloretin supplementation. Phloretin increased the population of CLBP. In 
conclusion, phloretin supplementation during PAH may mitigate PAH-associated 
physiological and biochemical alterations in broiler chickens.

Copyright Â© 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2025.105265
PMID: 40779808

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Authors declare no conflict of 
interest.