1. Afr Health Sci. 2024 Sep;24(3):180-187. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v24i3.22.

Correlation between abdominal visceral fat and the risk of endometrial cancer in 
patients with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)The first department of gynecology, Cangzhou central hospital, Hebei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the correlation between abdominal fat and the occurrence 
risk of endometrial cancer (EC) in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome 
(PCOS).
METHODS: The clinical information of 120 PCOS patients receiving treatment in 
our hospital from March 2019 to April 2022 were included in this study. Patients 
were divided into two groups, endometrial cancer (EC, n=35) and normal group 
(NM, n=85). Statistical analysis included t-test, c2-test, and Pearson's 
correlation coefficient. We analysed the data using logistic regression. The 
predictive accuracy and discriminative ability of the prediction model were 
assessed by the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
(AUC) and calibration curves.
RESULTS: The incidence rate of EC in women with PCOS is 10.91% (12/110). 
Significant differences were found in waist circumference, hypertension, 
diabetes, hyperlipidemia, body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR), insulin 
resistance index (HOMA-IR), visceral fat area (VFA) oestrogen receptor, 
progesterone receptor, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), 
estradiol (E2), and luteinizing hormone (LH) between the two groups (P<0.05). No 
statistical difference was found in age, hip circumference, menopause, use of 
intrauterine device, progesterone (P) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
between the groups (P>0.05). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed 
that BMI, HOMA-IR, VFA and HER2 were independent influencing factors of EC in 
PCOS patients (P<0.05). The AUC of BMI, HOMA-IR, VFA, HER2 were 0.878 (95%CI: 
0.810~0.946), 0.831 (95%CI: 0.751~0.911), 0.816 (95%CI: 0.704~0.929) and 0.737 
(95%CI: 0.634,0.840), respectively. The model had more diagnostic effectiveness 
(AUC=0.973).
CONCLUSIONS: In PCOS disease, high-level BMI, HOMA-IR, VFA, and positive HER2 
show an increased risk in the incidence of EC. These findings suggest that BMI, 
HOMA-IR, VFA, and HER2 are potential markers for Risk assessment of EC.HER2: 
Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2, E2: estradiol, P: progesterone, LH: 
Luteinizing hormone, FSH: Follicle-stimulating hormone.

Â© 2024 Zhang J.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v24i3.22
PMCID: PMC12327140
PMID: 40777932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.