1. Front Nutr. 2025 Jul 24;12:1584692. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2025.1584692.
eCollection  2025.

The relationship between carotenoids and diabetic nephropathy: insights from 
NHANES.

Wang L(#)(1), Feng T(#)(1), Tan Y(#)(2), Zhang J(2), Zhang T(1), Huo J(1), Song 
X(1), Lin X(1), Li M(1), Liang W(1), Ding Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Lianyungang Hospital of 
Xuzhou Medical University (The First People's Hospital of Lianyungang), 
Lianyungang, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Kangda College of Nanjing Medical 
University, Lianyungang, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Second People's Hospital of Lianyungang, 
Lianyungang, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Diabetic nephropathy (DN) poses significant health risks and imposes 
a substantial global disease burden. The association between carotenoid intake 
and DN remains unclear. Utilizing data from the 2007-2018 National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), this study investigates the relationship 
between multiple carotenoid subtypes and DN, aiming to inform exploratory 
insights for potential preventive strategies.
METHODS: This cross-sectional analysis utilized NHANES 2007-2018 data with a 
multistage stratified sampling design. After a four-stage screening process, 
baseline participants were selected by excluding individuals with lacking 
diabetes-related data, pregnant women, and those with incomplete carotenoid 
intake or DN diagnostic records. Model 1 included 25,483 participants, while 
Model 2 comprised retained 13,271 participants after further adjustment for 
covariates (demographic characteristics, lifestyle factors, clinical indicators, 
and socioeconomic parameters). Dietary intake of six carotenoid subtypes 
(α-carotene, β-carotene, β-cryptoxanthin, Lycopene, Lutein, Zeaxanthin) was 
calculated using as the mean of two standardized 24-h dietary recalls. Type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) was diagnosed based on fasting plasma glucose 
(≥126 mg/dL), HbA1c (≥6.5%), hypoglycemic medication use, or clinical diagnosis. 
DN was defined as a urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR) ≥ 30 mg/g or 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 in T2DM 
patients. Statistical analyses employed weighted multivariable logistic 
regression using the R survey package, adjusting for sampling design and 
covariates. Associations were quantified as odds ratios (ORs per 10 μg/d 
carotenoid intake) with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons. 
The significance threshold was set at α = 0.05.
RESULTS: This NHANES-based study revealed nonlinear associations between dietary 
carotenoids and diabetic nephropathy (DN) risk, with notable gender-and 
ethnicity-specific gender/ethnicity-specific effects. Univariate analysis 
demonstrated elevated DN risk with higher β-cryptoxanthin intake (OR = 1.413, 
95% CI), though significance was attenuated dissipated after multivariable 
adjustment, suggesting confounding mediation by obesity and hypertension. 
Multivariable models identified threshold effects: the low α-carotene intake 
group exhibited a 75% reduced risk (OR = 0.25, 95% CI), while the high-intake 
group showed a paradoxical risk elevation (OR = 2.24, 95% CI). β-Carotene 
displayed gender-divergent effects, with the highest tertile significantly 
reducing risk in males by 43% (OR = 0.57, 95% CI). Interaction models 
highlighted intensified α-carotene protection in males and Non-Hispanic White 
(OR = 0.27-0.29), whereas lycopene correlated with a fivefold increased DN risk 
in Non-Hispanic Black (OR = 4.99, 95% CI). Cardinal risk factors included 
advanced age (OR = 1.06/year), obesity (OR = 1.07/BMI unit), male sex 
(OR = 3.05), and hypertension (OR = 4.7), while higher education (OR = 0.72) and 
moderate alcohol consumption exerted inversely associated effects. These 
findings underscore the necessity of integrating nutrient thresholds (e.g., 
α-carotene optimization) and social determinants into DN prevention, though 
racial subgroup analyses warrant validation through prospective cohorts due to 
sample size constraints.
CONCLUSION: Clinicians managing DN should: Prioritize Consider α-carotene's 
biphasic dose-response relationship, prioritizing intake within the optimal 
dosage window; Utilize Leverage β-carotene's gender-specific benefits for male 
patients; Exercise caution in consider exploringing lycopene-rich dietary 
interventions diets for African American populations. Public health initiatives 
should incorporate nutrient-gender-ethnicity triadic assessments into DN 
education programs to advance precision nutrition guidelines.

Copyright © 2025 Wang, Feng, Tan, Zhang, Zhang, Huo, Song, Lin, Li, Liang and 
Ding.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2025.1584692
PMCID: PMC12330217
PMID: 40777169

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.